README.md, before:

# How-to guide and CLI for use in an Emptyhammock Docker-based Django application

## Requirements

* The Django application runs in a Docker container in your deployed environments.

## Assumptions of this documentation

* The Django application and database run natively in your development environment.
* The Django application reads environment variables from `.env`, using the `dotenv`
  package or some other mechanism.

## Documentation conventions

* `myproject` should be replaced with the name of your project.
* `local` should be replaced with the name of the Django settings module specific to your
  development environment, if different from `local`.

## Local development environment setup

### Python setup

* Your machine should have pyenv installed.
* Your project should have a `.python-version` file to specify the Python version for the project.
* Your project requirements should include `emptyhammock-project-commands`.

#### Install Python if not already installed

```shell
$ pyenv install -s
```

#### Create a virtualenv and install requirements

```shell
$ python -m venv ./venv/
$ . venv/bin/activate
$ pip install -r requirements/local.txt  # or `dev.txt` if it exists
```

### Environment variables

Set these in `.env`:

* Set `DJANGO_SETTINGS_MODULE` to `myproject.settings.local`

### Development database and media setup

As user `postgres`:

```bash
    $ createuser --createdb MYPROJECTNAME
    $ psql
    postgres=# alter user MYPROJECTNAME with password 'MYDBPASS';
    ALTER ROLE
    postgres=# \q
```

As developer:
```bash
    $ PGHOST=localhost createdb -U MYPROJECTNAME -E UTF-8 MYPROJECTNAME
    $ ./manage.py migrate
    $ ./manage.py createsuperuser
    ...
```

#### Get a database dump from the server and load into the local database

```bash
$ ehproject database get-dump production
$ ehproject database load-dump
$ ./manage.py migrate
```

#### Sync with the server media tree

```bash
$ ehproject media get-media production
```

## Managing deployed servers

### General preparation

Deployment is based on Ansible, which will be installed in the development
virtualenv or in a separate virtualenv as shown below:

```
$ python -m venv ./venv-deploy
$ . venv-deploy/bin/activate
$ pip install -r deploy/requirements.txt
    ...
```

Activate the virtualenv for deployment before running any of the shell commands
described in this section.

Configure your user and ssh public key in `deploy/devs.yml`.  After the next
deploy to a server, you'll be able to log in via `ssh`.  Ensure that the
username in `devs.yml` matches the username on your client system.

### Initial setup for VPS

The `sshpass` command must be installed on the client system.
(`sudo apt install sshpass`)

On the new server:

Fix the hostname in `/etc/hosts` and `/etc/hostname`.  Next:

```bash
# apt update && apt full-upgrade -y
# shutdown -r now
```

Code the IPv4 address in `deploy/inventory/production`, to control which server
Ansible deploys to.

For initial testing of the server, specify a self-signed certificate in
`deploy/environments/production/vars.yml`:

```
cert_source: "self-signed"
```

Normally this is `"certbot"`.  When initially bringing up the server, a
self-signed certificate is used.  After the domain name is changed, the
`obtain_certificate.sh` script is run to create a real certificate, then
`cert_source` is changed to start using it.

Only the `root` user will be available initially on a VPS, so a bootstrap step
is needed to define developer users.  Run the bootstrap step as follows:

```bash
$ ehproject playbook bootstrap production root
root password on server: 
Vault password: 
...
```

If the root password isn't needed because an ssh key is used to log in,
simply press ENTER at the password prompt.

If `.vault_pass` has been created, you won't be prompted for the vault
password.

Once the new server is operating properly, update the `maintenance` project
to include the server in regular maintenance tasks.

## Building and Pushing the Docker image

## Build

```bash
$ ehproject image build {--cache|--no-cache}
```

Note: It is important to build with `--no-cache` at least weekly so that fixes
in the base image are picked up.  This won't be needed for images that are built
in an environment  that doesn't retain an image layer cache.

## Push to ECR

After authenticating to AWS:

```bash
$ ehproject image push
```

## Deploying

```bash
$ ehproject playbook deploy staging
...
$ ehproject playbook deploy production
```

If only the Docker image changed:

```bash
$ ehproject playbook run production switch_to_latest_image
```

## Running management commands on the server

Use `ehproject manage`, as in the following examples:

```
    $ ehproject manage remote production showmigrations
    Running as user myproject...
    admin
     [X] 0001_initial
     [X] 0002_logentry_remove_auto_add
    auth
     [X] 0001_initial
     [X] 0002_alter_permission_name_max_length
     [X] 0003_alter_user_email_max_length
     [X] 0004_alter_user_username_opts
    ...
    $ ehproject manage remote staging shell
    Running as user myproject...
    Python 2.7.12 (default, Nov 19 2016, 06:48:10) 
    [GCC 5.4.0 20160609] on linux2
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    (InteractiveConsole)
    >>>
```

Commit message:

0.0.6: Fix database load-dump
This was previously implemented as a shell script, which pip did not
install.  Since that is a deprecated feature anyway, the script has
been reimplemented in Python, resolving the problem.

README.md, after:

# How-to guide and CLI for use in an Emptyhammock Docker-based Django application

## Requirements

* The Django application runs in a Docker container in your deployed environments.

## Assumptions of this documentation

* The Django application and database run natively in your development environment.
* The Django application reads environment variables from `.env`, using the `dotenv`
  package or some other mechanism.

## Documentation conventions

* `myproject` should be replaced with the name of your project.
* `local` should be replaced with the name of the Django settings module specific to your
  development environment, if different from `local`.

## Local development environment setup

### Python setup

* Your machine should have pyenv installed.
* Your project should have a `.python-version` file to specify the Python version for the project.
* Your project requirements should include `emptyhammock-project-commands`.

#### Install Python if not already installed

```shell
$ pyenv install -s
```

#### Create a virtualenv and install requirements

```shell
$ python -m venv ./venv/
$ . venv/bin/activate
$ pip install -r requirements/local.txt  # or `dev.txt` if it exists
```

### Environment variables

Set these in `.env`:

* Set `DJANGO_SETTINGS_MODULE` to `myproject.settings.local`

### Development database and media setup

As user `postgres`:

```bash
    $ createuser --createdb MYPROJECTNAME
    $ psql
    postgres=# alter user MYPROJECTNAME with password 'MYDBPASS';
    ALTER ROLE
    postgres=# \q
```

As developer:
```bash
    $ PGHOST=localhost createdb -U MYPROJECTNAME -E UTF-8 MYPROJECTNAME
    $ ./manage.py migrate
    $ ./manage.py createsuperuser
    ...
```

#### Get a database dump from the server and load into the local database

```bash
$ ehproject database get-dump production
$ ehproject database load-dump
$ ./manage.py migrate
```

Note: `load-dump` assumes the following values for local database access, which
can be overridden with the specified environment variable:

| Setting           | Default value | Environment variable override |
|-------------------|---------------|-------------------------------|
| Database user     | project name  | `DB_USER`                     |
| Database password | project name  | `DB_PASSWORD`                 |
| Database host     | `localhost`   | `DB_HOST`                     |
| Database port     | `5432         | `DB_PORT`                     |

#### Sync with the server media tree

```bash
$ ehproject media get-media production
```

## Managing deployed servers

### General preparation

Deployment is based on Ansible, which will be installed in the development
virtualenv or in a separate virtualenv as shown below:

```
$ python -m venv ./venv-deploy
$ . venv-deploy/bin/activate
$ pip install -r deploy/requirements.txt
    ...
```

Activate the virtualenv for deployment before running any of the shell commands
described in this section.

Configure your user and ssh public key in `deploy/devs.yml`.  After the next
deploy to a server, you'll be able to log in via `ssh`.  Ensure that the
username in `devs.yml` matches the username on your client system.

### Initial setup for VPS

The `sshpass` command must be installed on the client system.
(`sudo apt install sshpass`)

On the new server:

Fix the hostname in `/etc/hosts` and `/etc/hostname`.  Next:

```bash
# apt update && apt full-upgrade -y
# shutdown -r now
```

Code the IPv4 address in `deploy/inventory/production`, to control which server
Ansible deploys to.

For initial testing of the server, specify a self-signed certificate in
`deploy/environments/production/vars.yml`:

```
cert_source: "self-signed"
```

Normally this is `"certbot"`.  When initially bringing up the server, a
self-signed certificate is used.  After the domain name is changed, the
`obtain_certificate.sh` script is run to create a real certificate, then
`cert_source` is changed to start using it.

Only the `root` user will be available initially on a VPS, so a bootstrap step
is needed to define developer users.  Run the bootstrap step as follows:

```bash
$ ehproject playbook bootstrap production root
root password on server: 
Vault password: 
...
```

If the root password isn't needed because an ssh key is used to log in,
simply press ENTER at the password prompt.

If `.vault_pass` has been created, you won't be prompted for the vault
password.

Once the new server is operating properly, update the `maintenance` project
to include the server in regular maintenance tasks.

## Building and Pushing the Docker image

## Build

```bash
$ ehproject image build {--cache|--no-cache}
```

Note: It is important to build with `--no-cache` at least weekly so that fixes
in the base image are picked up.  This won't be needed for images that are built
in an environment  that doesn't retain an image layer cache.

## Push to ECR

After authenticating to AWS:

```bash
$ ehproject image push
```

## Deploying

```bash
$ ehproject playbook deploy staging
...
$ ehproject playbook deploy production
```

If only the Docker image changed:

```bash
$ ehproject playbook run production switch_to_latest_image
```

## Running management commands on the server

Use `ehproject manage`, as in the following examples:

```
    $ ehproject manage remote production showmigrations
    Running as user myproject...
    admin
     [X] 0001_initial
     [X] 0002_logentry_remove_auto_add
    auth
     [X] 0001_initial
     [X] 0002_alter_permission_name_max_length
     [X] 0003_alter_user_email_max_length
     [X] 0004_alter_user_username_opts
    ...
    $ ehproject manage remote staging shell
    Running as user myproject...
    Python 2.7.12 (default, Nov 19 2016, 06:48:10) 
    [GCC 5.4.0 20160609] on linux2
    Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
    (InteractiveConsole)
    >>>
```
